
They differ in both algorithm/design and engineering details.

At a high level:

First script = round-based batch generator

Second script = streaming pipeline generator

Here is the concrete difference.

1. How they generate candidates
First script
It generates problems in rounds.

In each round it does:

launch n_generators independent generation calls

each call returns problems_per_generator problems

merge and dedupe them

then evaluate all new candidates

So with defaults it does:

5 generators × 2 problems = 10 candidates per round

This is why the header says it prefers quality over quantity: each generation call only asks for 2 problems, so the model can focus more per problem.

Second script
It generates one problem per generation call.

Each worker does:

generate 1 candidate

immediately evaluate it

return keep/skip

then the pipeline submits another one

So instead of “generate 10, then evaluate 10,” it behaves more like:

“keep a conveyor belt of candidate generation/evaluation running continuously.”

2. Prompt/output format for generation
First script
Generation prompt asks for:

a JSON array

exactly batch_size problems

each problem targeting a different technique

Output expected:

[
  {"problem": "..."}
]
It then tries to parse JSON, including some cleanup for malformed escaping.

Second script
Generation prompt asks for:

first a brief explanation of the targeted technique

then exactly one problem between delimiters

Output expected:

===PROBLEM START===
...
===PROBLEM END===
It extracts with regex instead of JSON parsing.

Practical effect
First script is stricter / more structured but more fragile if JSON formatting breaks.

Second script is looser and often easier for LLMs to obey.

3. Use of failed solutions
First script
It includes all failed solutions in each generation prompt.

So every generation call sees the whole bank of attempts.

Second script
It includes only one randomly chosen failed solution per generation call.

Reason given in code:

stay within context limits

over many calls, different failed traces still get exposed

Practical effect
First script gives richer context per call.

Second script gives less context per call, but more variety across calls and lower prompt length.

4. Parallelism structure
First script
Uses one shared thread pool and does this in phases:

parallel generation

parallel evaluation of all candidates

So it is batch synchronous.

Second script
Uses two pools:

gen_pool: concurrent candidate pipelines

solve_pool: parallel self-consistency solves inside each candidate evaluation

This is fully pipelined / asynchronous.

Practical effect
Second script is usually better at keeping workers busy and may have better throughput.

5. Dedupe
First script
Only uses exact string dedupe:

seen: set[str]
So if two problems are semantically the same but phrased differently, both may be kept.

Second script
Uses:

from pipeline_stages.dedupe import DedupeIndex
So it can do fuzzy dedupe unless --no-dedupe is passed.

Practical effect
Second script is better at removing near-duplicates.

6. Answer extraction
First script
Can do either:

regex extraction

or optional LLM-based extraction (llm_extract=True)

It looks for:

**ANSWER: ...**

\boxed{...}

fallback text patterns

optional extra LLM extraction prompt

Second script
Uses regex only, centered around:

\boxed{...}

No LLM-based answer extraction.

Practical effect
First script is more robust when answer formatting is messy.

Second script is cheaper/simpler/faster, but more brittle if the solver ignores formatting.

7. Retry logic / robustness
First script
Manual retry loop:

up to 3 attempts

exponential sleep 2**attempt

Second script
Uses tenacity:

up to 8 attempts

random exponential backoff

timeout support

Practical effect
Second script is more production-grade for flaky APIs.

8. Quality filtering
First script
Keeps a candidate if:

majority answer exists

answer is numeric

agreement is in the target window

That is it.

Second script
Can optionally do extra inline quality judging with:

--quality-threshold
If enabled, even candidates that pass the agreement window must also get a high enough usefulness score from another LLM pass.

Practical effect
Second script has an additional semantic quality filter.

9. Resume behavior
First script
Writes keeps.json and skips.json, but does not seem to resume from existing keeps.json.

Second script
If output_path already exists, it loads existing problems and resumes from them.

Practical effect
Second script is better for long interrupted runs.

10. Tinker checkpoint support
First script
Only uses Vertex/OpenAI-compatible API calls.

Second script
Can use either:

Vertex API

or a Tinker checkpoint via --tinker

It builds a fake OpenAI-compatible client around Tinker sampling.

Practical effect
Second script supports evaluating/generated from a fine-tuned checkpoint, not just the base API model.

11. CLI / project integration
First script
More self-contained and simpler:

hard-coded PROBLEM_STATEMENT

loads failed_solutions.json

runs directly

Second script
More integrated into a larger pipeline:

loads problem from --problem-path

loads reasoning traces from project data folders

supports run subdirs, stage1 outputs, checkpoint selection, ablations, dedupe toggles

Practical effect
First script feels like a standalone experiment.
Second script feels like the more mature pipeline version.

12. Generation philosophy
First script
The generation prompt explicitly says:

generate a set of techniques

produce multiple problems, each targeting a different technique

quality over quantity

So it is trying to get diverse batches every round.

Second script
The generation prompt says:

pick one technique/subskill

make one problem

Because it runs many times, diversity comes from repeated independent calls rather than from a single batch prompt.

In one sentence
First script = simpler, batch-oriented, high-context, multi-problem-per-call generator.

Second script = more scalable, resumable, pipeline-oriented, deduped, quality-filtered, checkpoint-compatible generator.

Biggest conceptual difference
The biggest real difference is this:

First script optimizes per-call generation quality by asking for a small batch from each independent generator.

Second script optimizes system throughput and control by turning generation/evaluation into a streaming pipeline with dedupe, resume, quality filtering, and checkpoint support.

Which is likely better for what
Use the first script if you want:

quick experimentation

simpler code

richer failed-solution context in each prompt

batch diversity per generation round

Use the second script if you want:

a production pipeline

resume support

fuzzy dedupe

optional quality judging

Tinker checkpoint support

better throughput on long runs

If you want, I can also give you a side-by-side table of differences or tell you which parts of the second script are genuine improvements versus just engineering complexity.


the problem that was generated for code 2 is much worse. investigate why? is it becasue we have a timeout somewhere? max token limit? 

Probably not a max-token cap in the code you showed.

I do not see any explicit max_tokens limit in either script’s generation call, so there is no obvious truncation cap being set by your code. A provider-side default could still exist, but from these scripts alone, that is not the main thing that jumps out.

The biggest reasons code 2 can generate worse problems are these:

1. Code 2 gives the generator much less context per call
In code 1, every generation call sees:

the full hard problem

all failed solutions

a request to generate multiple problems targeting different techniques

In code 2, each generation call sees:

the hard problem

only one randomly chosen failed solution

That is a major downgrade. If the randomly chosen failed solution is weak, narrow, or confused, the generator may anchor on the wrong subskill and produce a worse problem.

This line is especially important:

pick = random.choice(failed_solutions)
solutions_block = f"### Attempt 1\n\n{pick}"
So yes: code 2 is feeding the model less signal and also higher-variance signal.

2. Code 2’s generation prompt is weaker / less constrained
Code 1’s prompt is much sharper. It says things like:

identify distinct mathematical techniques

generate {batch_size} problems

each targets a different technique

explicitly avoid easy textbook exercises

explicitly write out techniques and concepts needed

Code 2’s prompt is looser:

“create a related math problem”

“similar in difficulty”

pick one technique

give a brief explanation, then the problem

That sounds harmless, but it gives the model more room to drift into vague “related” problems rather than precise bottleneck-isolating ones.

In particular, this phrase in code 2 is risky:

“similar in difficulty to the source problem”

That can push the model toward problems that are just hard-looking, not pedagogically targeted.

By contrast, code 1 is more curriculum-focused.

3. Code 2 extracts only one problem from a freer-form response
Code 1 forces JSON:

[{"problem": "..."}]
Code 2 asks for prose plus delimiters:

First briefly state which technique/subskill you are targeting and why.
Then write the problem statement between ...
That means code 2 encourages the model to spend generation budget on explanation, and also gives it more freedom in style. In practice, freer output formats often correlate with noisier generations.

So even if timeout is not the issue, prompt/output format quality likely is.

4. Code 2 removes LLM-based answer extraction and relies on regex only
This affects evaluation quality, not raw generation quality, but it can still make the final kept set worse.

In code 1:

answers can be extracted by regex

or with a fallback LLM extractor

In code 2:

answer extraction is regex only

solver must obey \boxed{...} formatting

So code 2 may:

mis-extract answers more often

miscompute agreement

keep the wrong candidates

skip good ones

That can make the dataset look worse even if generation itself is only somewhat worse.

5. Code 2 may be using a different model path when --tinker is on
If you ran code 2 with --tinker, then generation is no longer coming from the same serving path as code 1.

Code 2 can swap to:

Tinker checkpoint

different tokenizer / template application

different underlying weights

That could absolutely worsen generation quality.

So one key diagnostic is:

Did code 2 run with plain Vertex API?

Or with --tinker / checkpoint?

If it used Tinker and code 1 used Vertex base model, then this may be the main cause.

6. Code 2’s pipeline structure can increase variance in what gets kept
Code 1 works in rounds:

generate a batch

dedupe

evaluate all

Code 2 is streaming:

generate one

dedupe

evaluate

continue

This itself is not inherently worse, but paired with random failed-solution selection, it means you can get unlucky streaks where many candidates are generated from weak context.

So code 2 is more sensitive to prompt variance.

7. There is a timeout, but it is probably not the main culprit
Yes, code 2 has:

timeout: float = 180.0
...
client.chat.completions.create(..., timeout=timeout)
Code 1 does not pass a timeout.

So timeout is a real difference.

But if timeout were the main issue, I would expect to see:

many warnings like “LLM call failed after all retries”

empty responses

a lot of generation failures

Instead, your complaint is that the generated problems are worse, not that generation is failing. That points more toward prompt/context differences than hard timeout truncation.

Also, timeout is request timeout, not output-length truncation. It does not directly act like max_tokens.

8. I do not see an explicit max token limit
I do not see any of:

max_tokens=...

max_completion_tokens=...

custom sampling limit in the Vertex path

So from the code alone, I would not blame max-token limit first.

Caveat: provider defaults may still limit output length. But if that were the problem, I’d expect:

truncated delimiter blocks

malformed generations

missing ===PROBLEM END===

That is not the first thing I’d suspect from these scripts alone.

Most likely causes, ranked
Most likely
Only one random failed solution in code 2

Weaker / looser generation prompt in code 2

Freer output format in code 2

Regex-only answer extraction causing worse keep/skip decisions

Less likely but possible
Using Tinker/checkpoint in code 2

Timeout causing retries / degraded generations

Least likely from what I see
Explicit max token limit — I do not see one

What I would test first
Test 1: make code 2 use all failed solutions
Replace:

pick = random.choice(failed_solutions)
solutions_block = f"### Attempt 1\n\n{pick}"
with something like:

solutions_block = "\n\n---\n\n".join(
    f"### Attempt {i+1}\n\n{sol}"
    for i, sol in enumerate(failed_solutions[:3])
)
If quality jumps, that was a major cause.

Test 2: copy code 1’s generation prompt into code 2
Keep the streaming pipeline, but use code 1’s stricter generation prompt.

That isolates whether the issue is:

pipeline architecture
or

prompt quality

My guess: it is mostly the prompt.

Test 3: log the raw generated responses
For code 2, save:

chosen failed solution

raw generator output

extracted problem

Then inspect a few bad cases. I suspect you will see one of:

anchoring on a bad failed trace

vague “related” problems

incorrect technique selection

malformed or weak problem statements

Test 4: disable Tinker if you used it
Run code 2 on the same exact serving path/model as code 1.

Test 5: compare generation-only, before evaluation
Generate 50 candidates from each script and inspect them before solve/agreement filtering.

That tells you whether the problem is:

bad generation
or

bad downstream filtering

My best diagnosis
The main reason code 2 is worse is not timeout or max token limit.

It is much more likely due to this combination:

code 2 gives only one randomly selected failed solution

code 2 has a weaker, looser prompt

code 2 uses a less rigid output format

code 2’s downstream filtering is a bit noisier because extraction is stricter and simpler

So the regression is probably prompt/context quality, not token budget.

If you want, I can rewrite code 2’s generation part so it keeps the good engineering improvements but matches code 1’s stronger prompting behavior.


hi

hi



